# A temporal network analysis of drug co-prescription around
antidepressants and anxiolytics uses

Aly Lamuri, Spyros Balafas, Eelko Hak, Jens H. Bos, Frederike
JÃ¶rg, Talitha L. Feenstra

**Background:** The implementation of network analysis in medicine and
epidemiology started to gain popularity. A network-based approach
captures the relationships of the building blocks of a complex system.
Drug co-prescription is a complex issue presenting with one-to-many
relationships that may change over time, especially also in mental
disorders.

**Objectives:**  
Evaluate the temporal relationships of drug treatment for mood disorders
with other drug therapies in a pharmacy dispensing database.

**Methods:** Exploratory temporal network analysis was performed using
the University of Groningen prescription database, IADB.nl. A closed
cohort with at least one prescription of anxiolytics/antidepressants
dispensed anywhere from 2018 to 2022 was extracted. The drug
prescription was evaluated daily using anatomical therapeutic chemical
(ATC) classification, where psychopharmaca was evaluated at ATC level 4,
drugs for the nervous system at ATC level 3, and other medications at
ATC level 1, distinguished into a total of 24 therapeutic medication
classes. A drug prescription network was constructed as an undirected
graph to capture dose-adjusted co-prescription. Eigenvector centrality
($c_e$) was computed as a measure of relative nodal importance, which
reflects the degree of medication concurrence in a network. The number
of prescriptions ($n_c$), number of patients, claim-to-patient ratio,
and eigenvector centrality were extracted as weekly-aggregated
time-series data. Singular spectrum analysis was performed to decompose
the data into its constituting trend, harmonics, and noise components.

**Results:** Antidepressants (ATC `N06A`, $c_e$: 0.09, $n_c$: 28,993)
and anxiolytics (`N05B`, $c_e$: 0.04, $n_c$: 14,061) are psychopharmaca
with high eigenvector centrality. These classes of medication are likely
to be co-prescribed apart from other medications. Further groups with
high eigenvector centrality were medications for alimentary and
metabolism (`A01-A16`, $c_e$: 0.21, $n_c$: 53,602), blood (`B01-B06`,
$c_e$: 0.08, $n_c$: 13,310), cardiovascular (`C01-C10`, $c_e$: 0.19,
$n_c$: 44,802), analgesics (`N02`, $c_e$: 0.05, $n_c$: 13,847), and
respiratory (`R01-R07`, $c_e$: 0.09, $n_c$: 25,034). Among the seven
medication groups with high eigenvector centrality, only antidepressants
showed a positive time trend for both eigenvector centrality and actual
number of claims.

**Discussion:** Seven medication therapy classes, three of which are
psychopharmaca, had a high eigenvector centrality, indicating
concurrence with other medication groups on a population level in the
group of antidepressant or anxiolytic users. Positive time trends in
both eigenvector centrality and dispensing suggest that increasing uses
of antidepressants was related to co-prescription with other medication
classes. Constructing a prescription network enriches the exploratory
analysis of medication use at the population level.
