# Eigenvector centrality signifies antidepressants as a central hub of
the co-medication network
Aly Lamuri, Frederike JÃ¶rg, Eelko Hak, Jens H. Bos, Talitha L. Feenstra

**Background:** Mental health disorders are prevalent comorbidities
affecting nearly two billion people worldwide. People with chronic
diseases are at a higher risk of having mental health issues. We
evaluate the interrelatedness of mental health problems with other
diagnoses, reflected as a relative importance score of psychopharmaca in
a medication claim registry.

**Methods:** Exploratory time-series analysis was performed in a static
cohort from IADB.nl with at least one prescription of psychopharmaca
from 2018 to 2022. The prescription was evaluated daily using anatomical
therapeutic chemical (ATC) classification. A drug prescription network
was constructed to capture dose-adjusted co-prescription. Eigenvector
centrality ($c_e$) was computed as a measure of relative nodal
importance, which reflects the degree of medication concurrence in a
network. The number of medication claims ($n_c$) and eigenvector
centrality were extracted as weekly-aggregated time-series data.

**Results:** Antidepressants ($c_e$: 0.11, $n_c$: 28,993),
antipsychotics ($c_e$: 0.07, $n_c$: 14,027), and anxiolytics ($c_e$:
0.08, $n_c$: 14,061) are psychopharmaca with high eigenvector
centrality. These classes of medication are likely to be co-prescribed
alongside other medications. Further groups with high eigenvector
centrality were medications for alimentary and metabolism ($c_e$: 0.15,
$n_c$: 53,602), blood ($c_e$: 0.06, $n_c$: 13,310), cardiovascular
($c_e$: 0.14, $n_c$: 44,802), analgesics ($c_e$: 0.09, $n_c$: 13,847),
and respiratory ($c_e$: 0.09, $n_c$: 25,034). Only antidepressants had a
positive time trend for both eigenvector centrality and the number of
claims.

**Conclusion:** Eight medications have a high concurrence on a
population level. Positive time trends in both eigenvector centrality
and claims suggest that increasing uses of antidepressants are related
to co-prescription with other medication classes. We recommend
constructing a medication claim network to evaluate periodic
co-prescription as a public health monitoring procedure.
